---
layout: post
author: bela
---
hello

https://jwt.io/

A **Jason Web Token** (JWT) is a simple string that can be used to **authenticate** a user (is the user who they say they are). It is a string containing 3 parts, using `.` as a separation symbol.

```json
"eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiIsInR5cCI6IkpXVCJ9.eyJzdWIiOiIxMjM0NTY3ODkwIiwibmFtZSI6IkpvaG4gRG9lIiwiYWRtaW4iOnRydWUsImlhdCI6MTUxNjIzOTAyMn0.KMUFsIDTnFmyG3nMiGM6H9FNFUROf3wh7SmqJp-QV30"
```

The three parts can be decoded to get

- **header** - metadata (JSON)
- **body** - data (JSON)
- **signature** - used for authentication (string)

When a user logs on, the server will send a JWT to the user. The token is generated by the server by taking the header + body and hashing it using a secret key. This signature is unique and can only be created by combining the header + body (public information found in the JWT) with the secret key (private information stored on the server).

When the server receives a JWT, it will separate it into the header, body, and the signature. It will then create a *correct signature* by combining the header + body found in the JWT with the secret key stored on the server. If the signature found in the JWT is the same as the correct one generated by the server, then the user must be valid.

# Generating a JWT

In order to construct a JWT three inputs are required:

- **header -** contains metadata about the token
- **body -** contains relevant information about the user, and token expiration time
- **secret key -** is used for authentication

The first step is to encode the header and body JSON using base64 encoding. The encoded header and encoded body are then joined together to form a message string. This message string is hashed using an algorithm defined in the header JSON (SH256 is very common), using the secret key, resulting in a signature. The encoded header, encoded body, and signature are then joined together to form the JWT token.

!Untitled

## 1) Encoding Header & Body

The first step is to use base64 encoding to encode the `header` and `body` string.

!Untitled

```python
from base64 import urlsafe_b64encode

def encode_string(string:str) -> str:
    """
    Takes a string and returns a base64url encoded string.
    """
    # byte representation using utf-8 encoding
    utf8_bytes_object = string.encode('utf-8')

    # encode byte object using base64 encoding (convert 8-bit bytes to 6-bit bytes)
    base64_bytes_object = urlsafe_b64encode(utf8_bytes_object)

    # decode bytes object to string
    base64_string = base64_bytes_object.decode('utf-8')

    # remove padding before returning
    return base64_string.rstrip("=")
```

## 2) Create Signature

The second step is to generate a signature based on the encoded header, encoded body, and secret key. The `encoded_header` and `encoded_body` strings are joined together into a `message`,  using a `.` as separation symbol.

The `message` is then hashed using an algorithm (e.g. SH256), using the `secret_key` as the hashing key. The result is the `signature`

!Untitled

```python
import hmac
import hashlib

def create_signature(header:str, body:str, secret:str) -> str:
    """
    Takes a header, body, and secret and returns a base64url encoded signature.
    """
    # combine encoded body and encoded header
    message = encode_string(header) + "." + encode_string(body)

    # generate signature
    signature = hmac.new(
        key=secret.encode('utf-8'),
        msg=message.encode('utf-8'),
        digestmod=hashlib.sha256
    ).digest()

    # base64 encode signature
    encoded_signature = urlsafe_b64encode(signature).decode('utf-8').rstrip("=")
    return encoded_signature
```

## 3) Create JWT

Finally the `encoded_header` string, `encoded_body` string, and `signature` string are joined together (where `.` is again used as separation symbol) to form the `JWT` token.

!Untitled

```python
signature = create_signature(header, body, secret_key)

JWT = encode_string(header) + "." + encode_string(body) + "." + signature
```

# Verifying a JWT

The idea of using a JWT, is that when the user authenticates, the servers sends them a token (JWT) inside of a cookie. The client machine will store this cookie, and whenever the client makes a request to the server, it will send a cookie containing the authentication token along with the request. The server will then verify if the token it received is valid before responding with the data.

The whole point of JWTs is to not save any user information on the server itself. Instead the header and body of the token can be used in combination with the secret_key stored on the server to generate the correct signature. This correct signature can then be compared with the provided signature.

## 1) Decode Header and Body

A JWT is a string, which is split into three parts using a `.` as separation symbol. Each substring is base64 encoded, and once decoded will provide data in JSON format:

```python
from base64 import urlsafe_b64decode

def base64url_decode(input:str):
    """
    Takes a base64url encoded string and returns the original string.
    """
    # add padding to input
    padding = '=' * (4 - (len(input) % 4))
    input = input + padding

    # convert string to bytes object
    base64_bytes_object = input.encode('utf-8')

    # decode base64 bytes object to utf-8 encoded string
    utf8_bytes_object = urlsafe_b64decode(base64_bytes_object)

    # decode utf-8 encoded string
    string = utf8_bytes_object.decode('utf-8')

    return string
```

## 2) Generate Correct Signature

The correct signature can be found by creating a signature from the `header` and `body` found in the `JWT`.  The generated `correct_signature` should be equal to the `signature` found in the `JWT`.

```python
header, body, signature = JWT.split(".")

header = base64url_decode(header)
body = base64url_decode(body)

correct_signature = create_signature(header, body, secret='bamboozle')

correct_signature == signature
```

# Session vs Jason Web Token

## Session

Traditionally speaking the authorization is performed by storing an authorized user in the server memory.

The user logs in with their username and password, if the right credentials are provided the server will create a session for the user in memory. As part of the authentication process the server will send a session ID inside of a cookie to the client.

Whenever a user wants more data from the server, it sends a request with a cookie containing the session ID. The server will only return data to the user if the session ID is in the list of active session IDs in the server’s memory.

!Untitled

## Token

Using a JWT is very similar, except that no data is stored in the server memory. Instead only a single Secret Key is necessary to check whether or not the provided JWT is correct or not.

!Untitled

Similar to a session, the user logs in using their username and password credentials. The server then creates a Jason Web Token, which it sends to the client inside of a cookie.

**Advantages**

The main advantage is that the authorization data is not stored server-side, but client-side. For each request the server needs to check whether the client is a valid user, instead of checking an ID against a list of valid IDs, it checks whether the token is valid. To verify if the token is valid, only the secret key is required.

**Use Case**

Not only will this improve the server performance (no need to keep an active session ID for each user using the web-app), but also allows easy authorization between different servers.

If there are two servers using sessions, then the two servers would need to constantly synch the list of session IDs for active users. If the two servers are using tokens, then they simply need to use the same secret_key to validate the tokens.

!Untitled
