---
layout: post
author: bela
image:
title: SHA-256
---
Operations

# SHA-256 Functions
The SHA-256 Algorithm relies on 6 logical functions, all of which take as input 32 bit "words" and output 32 bit "words" (in this context a "word" is a binary encoding of a string).

**Choose function:**
$$\text{Ch}(x, y, z) = (x \land y) \oplus (\neg x \land z)$$

**Majority function:**
$$\text{Maj}(x, y, z) = (x \land y) \oplus (x \land z) \oplus (y \land z)$$

**Sigma 0:**
$$\Sigma_0(x) = \text{ROTR}(2, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(13, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(22, x)$$

**Sigma 1:**
$$\Sigma_1(x) = \text{ROTR}(6, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(11, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(25, x)$$

**sigma 0:**
$$\sigma_0(x) = \text{ROTR}(7, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(18, x) \oplus \text{SHR}(3, x)$$

**sigma 1:**
$$\sigma_1(x) = \text{ROTR}(17, x) \oplus \text{ROTR}(19, x) \oplus \text{SHR}(10, x)$$

> *See Appendix A for more information about bitwise opertions used in these functions*

```python
choose = lambda x, y, z: (x & y) ^ (~x & z)
majority = lambda x, y, z: (x & y) ^ (x & z) ^ (y & z)

Sigma0 = lambda x: rotr(x, 2) ^ rotr(x, 13) ^ rotr(x, 22)
Sigma1 = lambda x: rotr(x, 6) ^ rotr(x, 11) ^ rotr(x, 25)
sigma0 = lambda x: rotr(x, 7) ^ rotr(x, 18) ^ shr(x, 3)
sigma1 = lambda x: rotr(x, 17) ^ rotr(x, 19) ^ shr(x, 10)
```

# SHA-256 Constants
The SHA-256 Algorithm relies on 64 constants: the fractional parts of the cube roots of the first 64 prime numbers. These constants (in hexidecimal) are given below:
```
428a2f98 71374491 b5c0fbcf e9b5dba5 3956c25b 59f111f1 923f82a4 ab1c5ed5
d807aa98 12835b01 243185be 550c7dc3 72be5d74 80deb1fe 9bdc06a7 c19bf174
e49b69c1 efbe4786 0fc19dc6 240ca1cc 2de92c6f 4a7484aa 5cb0a9dc 76f988da
983e5152 a831c66d b00327c8 bf597fc7 c6e00bf3 d5a79147 06ca6351 14292967
27b70a85 2e1b2138 4d2c6dfc 53380d13 650a7354 766a0abb 81c2c92e 92722c85
a2bfe8a1 a81a664b c24b8b70 c76c51a3 d192e819 d6990624 f40e3585 106aa070
19a4c116 1e376c08 2748774c 34b0bcb5 391c0cb3 4ed8aa4a 5b9cca4f 682e6ff3
748f82ee 78a5636f 84c87814 8cc70208 90befffa a4506ceb bef9a3f7 c67178f2
```

# SHA-256 Initial Hash Values
The SHA-256 algorithm starts with an intial set of values: the first thirty-two bits of the fractional parts of the square
roots of the first eight prime numbers

```
h0 := 0x6a09e667
h1 := 0xbb67ae85
h2 := 0x3c6ef372
h3 := 0xa54ff53a
h4 := 0x510e527f
h5 := 0x9b05688c
h6 := 0x1f83d9ab
h7 := 0x5be0cd19
```

# SHA-256 Algortihm
The algorithm will in theory work on any form of data, but the most common application is to hash simple text. So we will consider our input to be a message $M$, which will be a string.

For this article we will consider the phrase `"abc"` as our message $M$.

## Pre-Processing
SHA-256 expects as initial input (message $M$) as a series of $N$ number of 512-bit blocks. Each block $B_i$ is a bit-string (a sequence of bits: 1's and 0's) of length 512. How these blocks are created is according to a set of pre-processing instructions.

$$
M = B_1, B_2, ... , B_N
$$

Each block $B_i$ is broken up into 16 "words", where each word $w_j$ is a bit-string of length 32.

$$
B_i = w_1, w_2, ... , w_{16}
$$

> Note: *I am deviating from the notation in the specification, as they refer to the message in its entirety, the message blocks, and the "words" by the same variable $M$ but with various subscripts and superscripts. I find this can lead to some confusion, so I've introduced my own variable names*

The official specifications work in a very generalized manner, only looking at bits. However, as we are dealing with ASCII or utf-8 encoded text, and because the algorithm was designed with text input in mind, it is easier to work with bytes (chunks of 8 bits).
* Message $M$ consists of $N$ blocks $B$
* each block $B$ consists of 16 words $w$
* each word $w$ consists of 4 bytes
* 1 byte = 8 bits

| Entity | Symbol | Child-Entity | Number of Children | Size in bits |
| - | - | - | - |
| Message | $M$ | Block | $N$ | 512 $\times N$ |
| Block | $B$ | Word | 16 | 512 |
| Word | $w$ | bytes | 4 | 32 |
| byte | [-] | [-] | [-] | 8 |

The pre-processing step consists of 3 steps:
1) encoding the raw string
2) padding the resulting bits
3) dividing the message into blocks & words

### Step 1) Encoding
We will use either ASCII or utf-8 encoding to transform each character in the input string `"abc"` into a series of bytes.

```
   a        b        c
01100001 01100010 01100011
```

### Step 2) Padding
The next step is to pad the message in a very specific way. First a seperator byte `10000000` is added to the message.

```
   a        b        c        seperator
01100001 01100010 01100011    10000000
```

The last 8 bytes are reserved for the the length $l_b$ (in bits) of the original message. In this case the original message is 3 characters, and the encoding assigns 1 byte to each chracter, so the length of the original message is given by $l_b = 3 * 8 = 24$, which in binary is `11000`

```
   a        b        c        seperator      length
01100001 01100010 01100011    10000000    {00 ... 0011000}
```

Finally, the message in total needs to be a multiple of 512 bits, or in other words the message in total needs to be a multiple of 64 bits, so the rest of the message needs to be padded with empty bytes `00000000`. In general the number of empty padding bytes can be found by solving for $k$ in the following expression.

$$(k + l + 1) \mod 64 = 56$$

$l + 1$ is the integer value of the length of the input string $l$ (3 in our case), +1 for the seperator byte. Each block must be 64 bytes, and of those 64 blocks 8 are reserved to describe the length, hence the number 56 is used on the RHS of the equation.

In our case we have 3 bytes for the original message, 1 seperator byte, and 8 bytes to describe the length, which means we need 64-3-1-8 = 52 empty bytes. These empty bytes are always placed between the seperator and the length bytes.

```
   a        b        c        seperator       padding         length
01100001 01100010 01100011    10000000      {00 ... 00}     {00 ... 0011000}
```

### Step 3) Grouping
At this point we have a large sequence of bytes. Due to how the number of empty padding bytes was determined, we know the total length of the message $M$ (in bytes) at this point is a multiple of 64, we can very easily group the message into blocks $B_i$ of length 64.

In our example the input string `"abc"` is short enough that everything fits into a single block with a bunch of empty bytes.

```
01100001 01100010 01100011 10000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000
00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00011000
```

## Hashing Algorithm


# Appendix A: Bitwise Operations & Their Python Implementation

<iframe
  src="{{ '/assets/html_pages/bitwise.html' | relative_url }}"
  width="100%"
  height="700"
  style="border: none;">
</iframe>
